---
layout: post
title: PSL 2.1.0 Release
author: Eriq Augustine
date: 2018-07-29 10:00:00 -0700
tags: [release, v2.1.0]
---

We are happy to announce the release of PSL version `2.1.0`!
We have made great improvements to PSL in the areas of performance, expressively, and usability.

Here you will find a list of the major changes in `2.1.0` as well as information on migrating from `2.0.0`.

For those of you that learn better by example, check out the [PSL examples repository](https://github.com/linqs/psl-examples).
The `master` branch is always compatible with the most resent stable release,
while the `develop` branch stays up-to-date with our development work.

 - [Database](#database)
   - [PostgreSQL Database Backend](#postgresql-database-backend)
   - [Removed MySQL support](#removed-mysql-support)
   - [Removed the Queries Class](#removed-the-queries-class)
   - [Removed InserterUtils](#removed-inserterutils)
   - [Bulk Dataloading in Postgres](#bulk-dataloading-in-postgres)
   - [Deferred Indexing](#deferred-indexing)
   - [No More Predicate Deserialization](#no-more-predicate-deserialization)
   - [UniqueID Storage Types](#uniqueid-storage-types)
   - [Long Predicate Names Allowed](#long-predicate-names-allowed)

 - [CLI](#cli)
   - [CLI Configuration Properties](#cli-configuration-properties)
   - [Complete CLI Predicate Typing](#complete-cli-predicate-typing)
   - [Literals in String Rules](#literals-in-string-rules)

 - [Utilities](#utilities)
   - [Getting the PSL Version](#getting-the-psl-version)
   - [Random in PSL](#random-in-psl)
   - [Parallelization in PSL](#parallelization-in-psl)

 - [Infrastructure](#infrastructure)
   - [Configuration Reworked](#configuration-reworked)
   - [New Canary Naming System](#new-canary-naming-system)
   - [Inference API Rework](#inference-api-rework)
   - [Moved PSL Evaluation](#moved-psl-evaluation)
   - [Evaluation Infrastructure Changes](#evaluation-infrastructure-changes)
   - [External Function Support](#external-function-support)

---

## Database

The database is the center of the grounding strategy for PSL.
Since grounding is typically the single most costly operation when running PSL, we have put a substantial amount of work into improving our database interactions.

### PostgreSQL Database Backend
In fall of 2017, we added support for a [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) database backend.
However, we have not yet publicized it.
Those who have a large number of ground rules (> 1 million) will most likely benefit from using Postgres over H2 (the default).
All the details are on the [PSL wiki page for Postgres](https://github.com/{{ site.github_username }}/psl/wiki/Using-PostgreSQL-with-PSL).

Java/Groovy users just need to use `org.linqs.psl.database.rdbms.driver.PostgreSQLDriver` instead of `org.linqs.psl.database.rdbms.driver.H2DatabaseDriver`.

CLI users just need to pass the `--postgres` flag with an optional argument that is the name of the database to use.

### Removed MySQL support
Support for the [MySQL](https://www.mysql.com/) database backend has been removed.
Instead, users who need a faster database backend should use the [Postgres database backend](https://github.com/{{ site.github_username }}/psl/wiki/Using-PostgreSQL-with-PSL).

### Removed the Queries Class
The `Queries` class has been removed and all the functionality has been directly moved to the `ReadableDatabase` interface (implemented by the standard `RDBMSDatabse`).
So the same set of methods are available directly from your database.

### Removed InserterUtils
`InserterUtils` (from the `psl-dataloading` package) has been removed.
Instead, you can now get the same functionality (`loadDelimitedData()` and `loadDelimitedDataTruth()`) from the `Inserter` class.
This means that Groovy users no longer will need the `psl-dataloading` dependency in you pom file.

Instead of something like:
```java
Inserter inserter = dataStore.getInserter(Foo, obsPartition);
InserterUtils.loadDelimitedData(inserter, Paths.get(DATA_PATH, "foo_obs.txt").toString());
```

You can do this:
```java
Inserter inserter = dataStore.getInserter(Foo, obsPartition);
inserter.loadDelimitedData(Paths.get(DATA_PATH, "foo_obs.txt").toString());
```

The `loadDelimitedDataAutomatic()` method has also been added to the `Inserter` class.
This method has previously existed in some versions of PSL, but has not been publicized or documented.
This method will peek at the first line in the file and decide between `loadDelimitedData()` and `loadDelimitedDataTruth()`.

### Bulk Dataloading in Postgres
Users using the Postgres database backend will be loading data via the bulk-loading `COPY` command.
This command is specialized for fast data loading from structured sources.

No user intervention is required.
Calling one of the `loadDelimitedData*` methods will automatically use `COPY` if it is available, and fallback if it is not.

### Deferred Indexing
In PSL, we will now defer indexing data tables until a database is actually requested via `DataStore.getDatabase()`.
In typical use cases, people will construct a `DataStore`, insert the data, and then request a database for weightlearning/inference/evaluation.
Because we now defer indexing, data loading will be speed up and our index statistics will be more up-to-date (resulting in generally better query plans).

No user intervention is required for this change.
However, users should be aware of this change so that they do not needlessly create databases before inserting the data.
(If you do so everything will still work as it does now, you just will not see improvements in data loading speed.)
Pre-existing data tables are assumed to already be indexed.

### No More Predicate Deserialization
A rarely used feature in past version of PSL was predicate deserialization.
With this feature, users could use an existing database without specifying the program's predicates.
PSL would reconstruct the predicates from the structure of the database.
Unfortunately, supporting this feature significantly increases the complexity of other new features.
Therefore, we dropped predicate deserialization in favor of a simpler database structure.

Users who previously relied on predicate deserialization can instead just specify predicates explicitly.

### UniqueID Storage Types
The raw `UniqueID` type have been replaced by `UniqueIntID` and `UniqueStringID`.
This allows PSL to choose a better underlying storage type and make operations more efficient.
Using `UniqueStringID` will replicate the previous behavior and should work for any data.
However, using `UniqueIntID` will almost always be faster than `UniqueStringID`.

If you need to get a unique id in Java/Groovy, then you can just directly call new on it:
```java
UniqueIntID myIntId = new UniqueIntID(4);
UniqueStringID myStringId = new UniqueStringID("foo");
```

### Long Predicate Names Allowed
In previous versions of PSL, predicate names were limited to a certain length (which was decided by the database backend).
PSL now allows arbitrarily long predicate names.
If the name is too long for the database backend, then a hash of the name will be used instead.

---

## CLI

The PSL CLI has been improved to the point that it will be sufficient for most users.
Inference, weight learning, and evaluation are supported all in the CLI.
All examples in the [PSL examples repository](https://github.com/linqs/psl-examples) have implementations in both the CLI and Groovy interfaces.
To get quick information about usage, you can invoke the CLI with the `--help` flag.

### CLI Configuration Properties
You can now pass any PSL configuration options on the CLI command line.
Just use the `-D` option and specify the key-value pair.
For example, you can run PSL with debug logging like this:
```sh
java -jar psl.jar --infer --data example.data --model example.psl -D log4j.threshold=DEBUG
```

### Complete CLI Predicate Typing
In the CLI, you can now specify precise typing information for each predicate.
Previously, all predicate arguments in the CLI were typed as `UniqueStringID`.
The [CLI data file wiki page](https://github.com/{{ site.github_username }}/psl/wiki/CLI-Data-File-Format) contains all the information.

### Literals in String Rules
Literals in string rules have been expanded to generally accept all characters.
All literals (even numeric ones) must be quoted by single or double quotes.
PSL will convert the literal to its underlying storage type.

If a literal contains the same quote used at the start/end, then is must be escaped with a backslash.
Backslashes must always be escaped.

The following escapes are understood:
 - `\'` - Literal Single Quote
 - `\"` - Literal Double Quote
 - `\\` - Literal Backslash
 - `\t` - Tab
 - `\n` - Newline
 - `\r` - Carriage Return

---

## Utilities

### Getting the PSL Version
You can now get the version of PSL you are using.

Java/Groovy:
```java
org.linqs.psl.util.Version.get()
```

CLI:
```sh
java -jar psl.jar --version
```

### Random in PSL
Random values can now be statically fetched from the `org.linqs.psl.util.RandUtils` class.
This class is thread-safe.
Seeds can be set using the `RandUtils.seed` method or by setting the `random.seed` property.

### Parallelization in PSL
PSL now leverages multithreading in grounding and term generation.
By default, PSL uses all the available threads on the machine.
To set the number of threads, use the `parallel.numthreads` property.

Those writing code for PSL can take advantage of our parallelization infrastructure in the `org.linqs.psl.util.Parallel` class.

---

## Infrastructure

### Configuration Reworked
Both the `ConfigManager` and `ConfigBundle` have been removed and replaced with the static-only `Config` class.
The same methods are all supported.

Instead of:
```java
import org.linqs.psl.config.ConfigBundle;
import org.linqs.psl.config.ConfigManager;

public static void main(String[] args) {
   ConfigManager manager = ConfigManager.getManager();
   ConfigBundle config = manager.getBundle("mybundle");

   System.out.println(config.getString("key", "default"));
}
```

You can now do:
```java
import org.linqs.psl.config.Config;

public static void main(String[] args) {
   System.out.println(Config.getString("key", "default"));
}
```

### New Canary Naming System
The purpose of having a single build named `CANARY` is so that anyone can always grab just that build and be confident they have the latest published build.
However, the lack of version number can be confusing.
So as of now, we will always push two canary builds: one versioned and one unversioned.
The unversioned one will continue to be called `CANARY`.
The versioned one will have a suffix matching the next release and the number of canary builds pushed.
For example, this first versioned canary is called `CANARY-2.1.0`, the next one is `CANARY-2.1.1` and so on.

This way, those that want development improvement but a more static environment can use a versioned canary.
To check what canary versions are available, just look at our [maven repository](https://linqs-data.soe.ucsc.edu/maven/repositories/psl-releases/org/linqs/psl-groovy/).
I have retroactively versioned the canary released on December 8th as `CANARY-2.1.0`.

For more details on the canary builds, checkout the [PSL canary wiki page](https://github.com/{{ site.github_username }}/psl/wiki/Working-With-Canary).

### Inference API Rework
Now all inference methods inherit from `org.linqs.psl.application.inference.InferenceApplication`.
The `inference()` method (previously `mpeInference()`) now does not return anything.
If you need information about how inference ended, then you can query for the components of inference using:
 - `getGroundRuleStore()`
 - `getTermStore()`
 - `getReasoner()`

### Moved PSL Evaluation
To support evaluation in the CLI and more general scoring in search-based weight learning, the `psl-evaluation` package has been moved from the `psl-utils` repository into the `psl-core` package.
For most users, the only change is to remove `psl-evaluation` from their `pom.xml` file.

Any users using more obscure evaluation methods from the old `psl-evaluation` can still find them in the `psl-evaluation-extended` package (still in `psl-utils`).
Over time, this package will be phased out as we standardize all the evaluation methods.

### Evaluation Infrastructure Changes
All the PSL evaluation infrastructure has been reworked.
Now all evaluation classes (previously called `Comparator` now called `Evaluator`) all follow the same interface. 

Java/Groovy users can follow the general pattern:
```java
Evaluator eval = new ContinuousEvaluator();
eval.compute(resultsDB, truthDB, MyTargetPredicate);
System.out.println(eval.getAllStats());
```

CLI users can use the ``--eval`` option and specify the type of evaluator to use:
```sh
java -jar psl.jar --infer --data example.data --model example.psl --eval org.linqs.psl.evaluation.statistics.ContinuousEvaluator
```

The [PSL examples](https://github.com/linqs/psl-examples) show how to use the evaluation infrastructure (in both Groovy and CLI).

### External Function Support
External functions have been reworked to not rely on the backend database.
This means that all database backends now support external functions with no additional work.

In addition, the database abstraction passed to external functions has been changed from a `ReadonlyDatabase` to a `ReadableDatabase`.
This allows external functions to access more database functionality.
